##Ornge Clinical Practice Guideline: Inhaled Epoprostenol Sodium (Flolan)**Background**  Epoprostenol (Flolan®) is a prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) which inhibits platelet aggregation and is a potent vasodilator.When administering epoprostenol via inhalation, it results in selective pulmonary vasodilation to areas ventilatedas these are the areas where the drug is delivered to. This results in improved ventilation/perfusion matching,reduced pulmonary artery pressures, improved right ventricular (RV) function, and decreased hypoxemia.Pulmonary vasodilators have been used in refractory acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This is reservedas a rescue and temporizing measure along with other higher evidence interventions (such as prone ventilation).Inhaled epoprostenol is a cost effective alternative to inhaled nitric oxide therapy.  
A <i>favourable response</i> to therapy is typically defined as:* ≥ 20% improvement in PaO2 or P/F ratio, or* ≥ 15% reduction in mean pulmonary artery pressure, and/or* ≥ 15% increase in cardiac output
An <i>unfavourable response</i> to therapy is typically defined as:* <20% improvement in PaO2 or P/F ratio, or* <15% reduction in mean pulmonary artery pressure, and/or* <15% increase in cardiac output**Typical dosage range**  
* 0 – 50 ng/kg/min (ideal body weight)* Inhaled epoprostenol is usually started at the maximum dose and titrated by 10-20 ng/kg every hour depending on response**Precautions**  
* Acute discontinuation of the medication can result in **rebound pulmonary vasoconstriction.** This effect usually presents itself within 30 minutes of discontinuation of the medication. If inhaled epoprostenol is weaned or discontinued prior to crew arrival, ensure that the ventilatory parameters remain **stable for at least 30 minutes prior to transport.** Epoprostenol should always be weaned slowly to avoid rebound pulmonary vasoconstriction.* Systemic **hypotension**, because of the vasodilatory properties, is possible but has not been directly linkedwith typical dosage ranges of inhaled epoprostenol (0-50 ng/kg/min)* **Bleeding**, due to inhibition of platelet aggregation, is possible but has not been directly linked with typical dosage ranges of inhaled epoprostenol (0-50 ng/kg/min). Administration should be **avoided during active hemorrhage (especially pulmonary hemorrhage).*** Epoprostenol may act as a **pulmonary irritant** due the solutions’ alkaline pH (10.2 to 10.8). Care must betaken to avoid accidental spillage into the trachea. Because of this, use with caution in patients with **reactive airways/bronchospasm.*** **Volume overload/pulmonary edema** has been reported from increased flow. Careful consideration andcaution should be taken in this patient population.* Epoprostenol is **photosensitive**. The medication will need to be shielded from light.* Due to the **viscosity** of the diluent, the filters can become **sticky and blocked**. If this happens, auto-PEEPing can occur. Filters on the ventilator need to be changed frequently (typically Q4H to QShift on double limb ICU vent circuits). **For the LTV1200, filters should be changed approximately <u>every 2 hrs</u> to ensureconsistent drug delivery and to avoid auto-PEEPing.****Procedure (for single limb ventilator circuit setup)**
1. Determine the dose of inhaled epoprostenol the patient is currently receiving, last titration, and anyhemodynamic or ventilatory changes (improvement or worsening) with the inhaled vasodilator therapy,and latest arterial blood gases (pre- and post-initiation/dose change).2. Patch to TMP to obtain orders to maintain inhaled epoprostenol for transport (**dose titration should not beattempted in transport** unless specifically directed and discussion by TMP with sending MD).3. Review sending facility infusion/nebulizer setup for inhaled epoprostenol and familiarize with the nebulizerdevice and functionality. Keep the nebulizer device plugged in and/or bring a backup setup in the event thebattery runs out.4. Ensure an adequate amount of epoprostenol is obtained from sending facility and that the medication isshielded from light.5. Place two filters (HMEs in series) and connect to the LTV circuit at the distal end of the expiratory limb;place one HME at the proximal end of the inspiratory limb.6. Connect the nebulizer circuit between the inspiratory limb HME and inspiratory limb circuit.7. If prolonged transport or delays, **filters should be changed every 2 hours** to avoid auto-PEEPing due toviscosity of the reconstituted mediation.