##Ornge Clinical Practice Guideline: Spinal Cord Injury<i>Please refer to the Drug Monographs and References document for references listed in the CPGs</i>
Guidelines for management of patients with suspected or known spinal cord injury in the transport setting, usingcurrent best practice and best available evidence.
Definition  A spinal cord injury is a partial or complete disruption (suspected or actual) of the spinal cord, resulting indysfunction (motor, sensor, or both) distal to the level of the disruption.
Guiding Principles  Patients with spinal cord injury are at potential risk of secondary injury due to further disruption of the spinal cord,exhibit loss of motor or sensory function (or both) below the level of injury, and may exhibit hemodynamic andautonomic instability. Management is directed at transporting to definitive care while mitigating further injury andmanaging physiologic disruption that results due to the injury.
Patients with a known or suspected spinal cord injury should, where possible, be transported directly to a centredesignated to manage multisystem traumatic injuries, including spinal cord injuries^5.
Use of spinal boards
* Spinal boards or adjustable break-away stretchers should be considered primarily as extrication/patientlifting devices. The goal should be to remove the patient from these devices as soon as it is safe to do so. Ifsufficient personnel are present, the patient should be log rolled from the extrication device to thestretcher during loading of the patient or shortly after loading into the ambulance.* Spinal boards or adjustable break- away stretchers may remain in place if the paramedic deems it safer/more comfortable for the patient in consideration of short transport times (<30 minutes).
Patients with spinal cord injury may have disruption of motor or sympathetic nerves, resulting in decreased muscleor sympathetic tone distal (caudad) to the disruption. The resulting muscle flaccidity and vasomotor tone mayresult in hypotension with a variable heart rate response. This condition is referred to as neurogenic or spinalshock<sup>9, 10</sup>.
Patients with spinal cord injury may have disruption of sensory pathways, resulting in altered or loss of sensationdistal (caudad) to the disruption. The resulting paresthesia makes identification of injury due to pain difficult orimpossible. As a result, maintain a high degree of suspicion for hidden injuries such as long bone fractures, pelvicdisruption, or intraabdominal (solid organ, hollow viscus) injuries. Other injuries must be definitively excludedbefore assigning the cause of hypotension to the spinal cord injury.
Early fluid resuscitation is necessary to maintain tissue perfusion, but care must be taken to avoid fluid overload.The first treatment priority for hypotension is crystalloid resuscitation. The intravascular volume should first berestored with fluids, then vasopressors (norepinephrine, phenylephrine) may be used to treat ongoinghypotension^11. The appropriate resuscitation end point and optimal mean arterial blood pressure for maintenanceof spinal cord perfusion are not well known, but use of fluids and vasopressors to achieve a minimum mean arterialpressure of 80 mmHg have been shown to improve outcomes<sup>6,7</sup>. Avoiding hypotension in brain-injured patients isparamount in early treatment because diminished cerebral perfusion pressure may contribute to secondaryneuronal injury^8. Any hypotension should be recognized and treatment initiated promptly with the goal ofpreventing further hypotension and maintaining a MAP > 80.
No clinical evidence exists to definitively recommend the use of any neuroprotective pharmacologic agent,including steroids, in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury to improve functional recovery<sup>12(435)</sup>.
Advanced airway procedures, such as intubation, require special care to ensure that the unstable spine remainsaligned. The goal of intubation is to secure the airway with as little movement of the cervical spine as possible. Thestandard urgent or emergent intubating technique for someone with a presumed or known cervical spine injury is arapid sequence induction with manual inline stabilization<sup>12(433)</sup>. Manual inline cervical stabilization does not resultin worsening of neurologic status after airway management15, and results in less cervical movement than a cervicalcollar alone^16.
Hypoxia or manipulation of the larynx or trachea may cause profound bradycardia or even cardiac arrest in thepatients with high spinal cord injuries<sup>13, 14</sup>. Atropine pre-treatment prior to upper airway procedures is appropriatewhen bradycardia exists prior to airway manipulation. Positive pressure ventilation can cause hypotension^14.Intravenous volume administration is needed prior to intubation, but additional vasopressor support is frequentlyrequired. The use of succinylcholine remains a safe muscle relaxant for use in the first 72 hours following injury, butnot thereafter.
Patients with spinal cord injury have a neurologic loss of the ability to void. Even in those with incomplete injuries,urinary retention is common. Place an indwelling urinary catheter as part of the initial patient assessment, unlesscontraindicated<sup>12(453-454)</sup>.
The altered sensation that results from spinal cord injury may result in greater than expected pain, due tomechanisms such as allodynia and neuropathic pain. Minimizing handling of the patient and use of analgesia(opiates) and sedative-hypnotics (benzodiazepines, dissociative agents) in the appropriate dose and interval willrelieve pain and anxiety.