##Ornge Clinical Practice Guideline: Obstetrics Evidence<i>Please refer to the Drug Monographs and References document for references listed in the CPGs</i>
Obstetrical history and pertinent maternal information should be routinely documented in all pregnant patients.The history should include the following: Gravida, Para, Abortus, Estimated Gestational Age, estimated date ofbirth (EDB), previous deliveries/complications, Group B strep (GBS) status, if known and antibiotic treatmentinitiated by sending facility. If available a copy of the Ontario Perinatal Record should be included in the patientdocumentation for receiving facility. The FHR should be auscultated and Paramedic assessment documented andreviewed with sending staff to confirm FHR pattern with previous assessments and any changes also recorded. Thereceiving facility should be updated with changes in baseline FHR or any abnormal findings to ensure fetal wellbeingand appropriate interventions are initiated as indicated. Patients should be placed in a left lateral positionby tilting or wedging the pelvis to achieve left lateral displacement of the uterus to prevent hypotensionsecondary to compression of the IVC.Repositioning the patient will also assist in an increase uteroplacentalperfusion and alleviate cord compression. SpO2 should be monitored in all pregnant patients and supplementaloxygen should be provided to achieve SpO2 94-98%.
**Premature Rupture of Membranes:**
* A woman is described as having Preterm PROM or PPROM if she has ruptured membranes before 37 weeksof pregnancy but is not in established labour. Gestational age, fetal presentation, and fetal well-beingshould be determined in all patients with PROM* In patients with preterm PROM, an initial period of fetal heart rate monitoring and uterineactivity monitoring may help to identify abnormal fetal heart tracing and to evaluate for contractions* Abnormal fetal heart rate tracing, clinical chorioamnionitis and abruptio placentae are clear indications fordelivery emergently* Antibiotics should be given for all patients positive for Group B Streptococcus (GBS) and considered for allpatients with Premature rupture of membranes<sup>7,8</sup>* Ampicillin 2 g IV q 6 hours and Erythromycin 250 mg IV q 6 hours for 48 hours should be given and followedby oral Amoxicillin 250 mg Q8H and Erythromycin 333 mg q 8 hours for 5 days for all PPROM patients lessthan 34 weeks gestation with no allergies to these medications. The use of Ampicillin-clavulanic acid isNOT recommended due to increased rates of necrotizing enterocolitis^4* For patients between 24 and less then 35 weeks gestation antenatal corticosteroids (eitherBetamethasone 12 mg IM every 24 hours for a total of two doses or dexamethasone 6 mg IM every 12hours for a total of 4 doses) should be administered in women with PPROM. Repeat steroids should begiven for patients < 33 weeks gestation who have not received steroids 14 days earlier and expected todeliver in the next 7 days* Steroids should not be used to treat in the presence of diagnosed intrauterine infection. ^43* Prophylactic tocolysis is not recommended for patients with PPROM with no signs of labor.* Women with PPROM before 32 weeks who are thought to be at risk for imminent delivery should betreated antenatally with IV Magnesium Sulfate 4 grams followed by a Magnesium Sulfate infusion, 1 gram/hr for 24 hours, to provide neuroprotection in preterm infantsDigital cervical examination generally shouldbe avoided unless the patient appears to be in active labor or delivery seems imminent**Preterm Labour:*** Patients with pain or possible labour should have documentation of duration and severity of contractions,frequency of contractions, progress, cervical dilatation, and fetal fibronectin testing results if available.^9* Tocolytics: For patients in preterm labour, the goal is to avoid delivery during transport. Tocolytics shouldbe strongly considered in order to minimize risk of delivery outside the hospital environment.Indomethacin 100 mg suppository followed by 25-50 mg every 6 hours for 48 hours total or niFEDIPine 10mg orally every 4-6 hours for 48 hours or until a total of 120 mg is reached can be considered for thetocolytic.<sup>10,11</sup>
Magnesium Sulfate: has not been shown to be an effective tocolytic, but is advised by many high risk obstetriciansfor neuroprotection in preterm labour, at gestational ages less than 32 weeks. This should be discussed with thereceiving obstetrician or may be continued in transport for this indication.<sup>12-16</sup>Steroids: For all patients 24+0 - 34+6 weeks, documentation should include Dexamethasone/ B-Methasone givenfor fetal lung maturation in case of possible preterm delivery. 
Glucorticoids should be considered for all obstetricalpatients in premature labour <35 weeks gestation.<sup>17-19</sup>
**Patient Pre-eclampsia:**Blood pressure should be monitored every 10 minutes for all patients with pre-eclampsia or eclampsia as per BLS/ALS provincial standards.^1 Magnesium Sulfate 4 g IV followed by 1 g IV/hr should be given for eclampsia or preeclampsiawith severe features including Proteinuria, Platelets <100,000, a doubling of the serum creatinine,abnormal liver function tests (twice the normal limit), pulmonary edema, and cerebral or visual signs & symptoms.A recurrent seizure may require a second 2-4g bolus over 20-30 minutes. In mild cases, management should bereviewed on a case by case basis, as there is no universally accepted standard for a precise indication for startingtreatment.<sup>20-26</sup> Benzodiazepine medications should be used for patients with ongoing seizures.^27 Antihypertensivemedications such as labetalol should be given as an initial dose of 20 mg IV and repeated 20-80 mg every 30minutes to a maximum of 300 mg. It is contraindicated in women with asthma or heart failure. NiFEDIPine 10 mgand then 10-20 mg every 45 minutes to a maximum of 50 mg. It should be swallowed and NOT chewed.HydrALAZINE 5 mg IV and repeat 5-10 mg every 30 minutes to a max of 20 mg should be considered for all ongoinghypertension.<sup>28,29</sup>
Hypertensive women may not tolerate large fluid volume shifts. Iatrogenic pulmonary edema is a concern becauseof the large amounts of intravenous fluids that may be inadvertently administered intrapartum. Intravenous andoral fluid intake should be limited in women with pre-eclampsia to avoid pulmonary edema. **The standardintravenous fluid bolus routinely administered before regional anesthesia should not be given.** The type of fluid isnot as critical as the volume of fluid. Hypotension and shock may develop with lesser degrees of hemorrhagebecause of vascular space contraction.
Urine output is best monitored by an indwelling Foley catheter. A urine output <15 ml/hour is not unusual in preeclampsia,particularly postpartum. In the absence of pre-existing renal disease of a rising creatinine level, Oliguriashould be tolerated at least for a few hours. The UK Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths found that excessmaternal mortality is associated with aggressive fluid use and not with transient renal compromise. In the presenceof Oliguria, a careful assessment of volume status and renal function is indicated. When a patient is undergoingmedication induction of labor and is receiving Magnesium Sulfate with oxytocin, it is prudent to limit IV fluid intakeby concentrating the solutions of oxytocin and Magnesium Sulfate. Hourly total intake and urine output must bemonitored closely in this situation to prevent pulmonary edema.Fluid Mangement Recommendations in the presence of Oliguria (<15 ml/hour):* Clinically assess volume status* Measure renal function (creatinine)* Beware of magnesium toxicity* Consider a small fluid bolus (500 ml normal saline)* Monitor O2 saturation (keep 94-98%)* Beware of pulmonary edema* Consider consultation, of Oliguria persists and creatinine is risingDopamine or furosemide should be administered in the presence of persistent Oliguria occuring before delivery
**Patient Post-Partum Hemorrhage:**

Uterine massage should be attempted for patients with persistent postpartum hemorrhage.^30 Use of oxytocinshould be systematic in cases of postpartum hemorrhage.<sup>31-33</sup> Ergonovine is contraindicated in hypertension. Thedose is 0.2-0.25 mg IV/IM every 2 hours and carboprost/hemabate should be given 250 mcg IM inintramyometrially every 15 minutes to a max of 8 doses for refractory postpartum hemorrhage.<sup>34-37</sup>
**Patient with Birth / Delivery:**Oxytocin should be given routinely as per current guidelines for delivery.38,31 APGAR scores should be documentedfor all births.^39##Obstetrical Transfer Preparation
1. The Paramedic ensures the patient is gowned appropriately for transport. An incontinence pad is used inpreparation for imminent delivery2. If the patient is in active labour (contractions 5 minutes apart), the patient should have one initial visualperineal examination completed and the findings documented. No digital vaginal or rectal examination isto be done to determine cervical dilatation or for any other concerns. The sending MD or RN should beasked to perform a cervical exam if not done within 1 hour of departure3. The following should be obtained:	* Fetal heart rate (intermittent assessment throughout transport must be completed)	* Expected date of birth (EDB)	* Duration of contractions (from beginning to end of one contraction)	* Frequency of contractions (from beginning of one contraction to the beginning of the nextcontraction)	* Para and gravida status	* A complete set of mother’s vital signs, repeated q 15 minutes	* Cervical dilatation4. Medical escorts are determined by the sending physician, TMP and paramedics5. Maintain SpO2 94-98%6. The mother is encouraged to lie on her left side or have a pillow placed under her right buttock to preventsupine hypotension syndrome7. The ACP(f), CCP and PCCP/PCCN must ensure that all obstetrical patients in active labour have peripheralintravenous access (normal saline TKVO or saline lock)8. Contraindications to transport include: inability to stabilize mother, suspected acute fetal compromise,delivery is imminent, weather conditions are too hazardous for travel.